CIP-0192? | Transaction Fee-Change Field (#1218)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-????/README.md

---
CIP: ?

> Title: Transaction Fee-Change Field

Reviewer: I'll update the PR title to this CIP title because it's much more clear & specific: especially since the term "fee change" is itself ambiguous.  If you have other ideas for a technically correct _and_ inspirational title please let's share some ideas at the meeting.

Category: Ledger
Status: Proposed
Authors:
    - Polina Vinogradova <polina.vinogradova@iohk.io>
    - Will Gould <will.gould@iohk.io>
Implementors:
  - Input Output Engineering <https://iohk.io>
Discussions:

>   - Tiered Pricing repo internal discussion: https://github.com/input-output-hk/tiered-pricing/pull/36

Reviewer: The repo `input-output-hk/tiered-pricing` appears taken down (I looked but can't find where it may have been moved to); maybe when the old Tiered Pricing project was cancelled? https://www.iog.io/news/change-of-course-acropolis-tiered-pricing

It would be good to see that these discussions had been archived anywhere & please update the link if so.

Author: the repo will become public shortly and this link will work

  - Original PR: https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/1218
Created: 2026-06-26
License: CC-BY-4.0
---

## Abstract

This proposal discusses a mechanism for users to receive change for fee overpayment. 
The amount of change given is the difference between the minimum fee calculated for that 
transaction and the fee specified by the transaction. The change is sent to the 
reward address specified by that transaction. 

## Motivation: Why is this CIP necessary?

Cardano currently collects the exact fee a transaction declares; there is no
mechanism for the protocol to return any portion of it to the submitter. Future fee

> schemes may require such a mechanism.

Reviewer 2: > ... *may* require ...

"may require" and "will require" are two different things. I understand the need for making phased changes, but it seems too early to say this is the right direction to go in. We don't have a clear picture of the destination yet.

I see it is *opt-in* but is that really good enough to warrant a change before we know the destination? I can't evaluate if this is a good idea or a bad idea until I know the end goal. What if we use neither dynamic or tiered pricing?

Author: We have an upcoming CIP about the pricing mechanism in the next couple of weeks that should hopefully clear things up. "Will" require is the current status

### Choice of reward address over payment address

Reward addresses are already used for staking rewards and pool
deposits, making them a natural fit.
Crediting a reward address ensures the UTxO set changes remain predictable 
locally. 

### Opt-in via optional field

By making `feeChange` optional, this CIP imposes zero overhead on transactions that
do not wish to participate in the compensation mechanism. It also means the change
can be deployed before the change calculation formula is finalized, without any
observable effect on current transactions. Finally, it allows backwards compatibility 
with transactions from previous eras.

### Alternatives considered

- **Implicit refund into the change output**: rejected because it requires the ledger
  to locate and modify a specific UTxO output, which would compromise the deterministic
   validation of Plutus scripts
- **Fixed portion of fee refunded**: rejected because the correct amount depends
  on fee dynamics that are not yet fully specified.

## Path to Active

### Acceptance criteria

- [ ]  This CIP has been communicated to, reviewed by, and agreed upon by a representative group of community members

> - [ ]  All major concerns have been addressed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Path to Active

### Acceptance criteria

- [ ]  This CIP has been agreed upon by a representative group of community members
- [ ]  All major concerns have been addressed
```
@polinavino (cc @lehins @WhatisRT) I think we need more detail for what may be required for this proposal to become `Active` (the _Implementation plan_ below seems straightforward enough).

We'll also have to perform due diligence to ensure that the CIP has been "communicated to" _and_ "reviewed by" Ledger representatives, multi-node developers, and wallet architects _**before** this CIP is merged_ 🤓 and so therefore no need to list this explicitly.

After that stakeholder & community review, whatever "concerns" may remain _specifically about the determination of `Active` status_ would go here in place of the final list item.

Author: i am not sure what details it would make sense to add here. Do you mean like, what hard fork this would go into? Or make it dependent on the exact tiered/dynamic pricing strategy?

Reviewer: @polinavino I was hoping to get some idea about how to make this section less vague from the first round of review by the Ledger reps and I apologise if my first reply was confusing on its own.  On second look: unless Ledger adds anything, I think you already have most of the major points in your Implementation Plan.

Inclusion in a hard fork would definitely be appropriate in the _Acceptance Criteria_ since then it would be `Active` without any doubt.  The other items currently there aren't required for `Active` status and apply more to the Implementation Plan (except those parts implicit in CIP review).

I'll suggest another reorganisation accordingly & resolve this point for now...

### Implementation plan

1. Update the formal ledger specification (`TxBody`, UTXO rule)
2. Update node ledger implementation/CDDL once the formal spec is stable.
3. Update wallet SDKs and tooling.
4. Test net deployment 

> 5. Main net deployment 

Reviewer: Removing redundant points from _Acceptance criteria_, anticipating that "major concerns" should be addressed immediately after any deployment stage, assuming a hard fork will be required, and improvising some community tests to demonstrate `Active` status....

Please let me know if you think anything should be changed before committing (note the first box is already ticked because we'll be doing it in the CIP review itself):
```suggestion
### Acceptance criteria

- [ ] Ledger changes live on Mainnet and included in a hard fork.
- [ ] Latest version of `cardano-cli` supports fee change specification by default.
- [ ] At least 2 mainstream Cardano wallets support fee change specification.

### Implementation plan

- [x] Agreement upon this CIP by a representative group of community members
- [ ] Update the formal ledger specification (`TxBody`, UTXO rule).
- [ ] Update node ledger implementation/CDDL once the formal spec is stable.
- [ ] Update wallet SDKs and tooling.
- [ ] Testnet deployment: addressing all major concerns
- [ ] Mainnet deployment: addressing all major concerns
```

---

> CIP: ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIP: TBD
```
... or `X` or some other metasyntactic null.  This has long caused a problem in front matter rendering on GitHub & so editors are lately trying to change this convention after the initial years of requiring it. 😖

> CIP: TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIP: \?
```
We (w/@Ryun1)  are working on the particulars in discussion of https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/issues/1216 - likely to conclude soon & I'll update CIP-0001 as soon as all the details are agreed upon & implemented in the validator.  In the meantime escaping the `?` should keep it happy (the alternative `TBD` that I suggested hasn't yet been implemented in practice).

Reviewer: p.s. apparently this too is incorrect & the CIP validator doesn't recognise escaping the `?`... it [must be double-quoted](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/actions/runs/28713663476/job/85151249079?pr=1218) even though other syntaxes would resolve the YAML error (cc @Ryun1).  I'll commit this to avoid bothering anyone again & should get green-light from validator after that.

> CIP: "?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CIP: 192
```

at the time of inclusion was lower than anticipated, or because the transaction's
specified expected delay period was exceeded before it was entered into a block.
In both cases, monetary compensation of part of the stated transaction fee may be owed. 
That is, the transaction commits to an
upper bound on what it is willing to pay, and change is given when the actual
collected fee is lower. The mechanism we propose in this CIP facilitates this.

This CIP specifies that the amount of change is calculated as the difference between 
the minimum fee and the transaction fee. This is a placeholder calculation, 
since there is no concrete formula available for possible future fee pricing mechanisms. 
The goal here is solely to establish the on-chain channel through which change can be
returned, so that the transaction body format does not need to be revisited once the
fee calculation is agreed upon.

There is precedent for a fee change mechanism in 
[Ethereum](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559), which has been, to 
some extent, the inspiration for the mechanism discussed in this CIP.

## Specification

### New transaction body field

> A new optional field `feeChangeAddr` is added to the transaction body `TxBody` :

Reviewer 3: We no longer call them RwdAddr, due to CIP-159, which promotes reward addresses to proper accounts
```suggestion
A new optional field `feeChangeAccount` is added to the transaction body `TxBody` 
```

```

> feeChangeAddr : Maybe RwdAddr

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
feeChangeAddr : Maybe AccountAddress
```

```

> Where the reward (staking) address `feeChangeAddr` is the address to which the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Where the `AccountAddress` in `feeChangeAccount` is the address of an account to which the
```

> compensation is credited. Using a reward address rather than a payment address

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compensation is credited. Using an account address rather than a payment address
```

> ensures the credit is handled through the existing rewards-withdrawal mechanism

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ensures the credit is handled through the account based mechanism introduced in CIP-159
```

and does not need to be reflected in a transaction output. Making the change 
address optional allows for backwards compatibility. 

### Ledger rule changes

#### Transaction validity

No additional signing requirements are imposed, as it is not mandatory for a 
user to output fee change into an address they own. 

> **`feeChangeAddr` provided.** When a transaction provides 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**`feeChangeAccount` provided.** When a transaction provides 
```

this address, the following changes to ledger rules are required :

(1) To the *produced* calculation :

- the `txb .txFee` summand is replaced with `collectedFee pp utxo tx`

`collectedFee pp utxo tx = minfee pp utxo tx`

- a summand is added `feeChange pp utxo txb`, where we define 

`feeChange pp utxo txb = txb .txFee - minfee pp utxo tx`

(2) In the `UTXO` rule, we add a check 

- `0 ≤ feeChange pp utxo txb`

> (3) We update the reward on the ledger state with this calculation, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(3) We update the account balance on the ledger state with this calculation, 
```

which is performed after all other ledger state changes resulting from 
transaction processing :

```agda
rwds' = rwds ∪⁺ ❴ feeChangeAddr , feeChange ❵ᵐ
```
**`feeChangeAddr` not provided.** When this value is `feeChangeAddr = Nothing`, no changes 
to ledger rules are required.

#### Fee accounting

Note that both calculations `collectedFee` and `feeChange` would be replaced 
by whichever rules for calculating fee change will be required by future
fee calculation changes.

#### `TxInfo`

It is important to note that no changes to `TxInfo` are required. 

The reason for this is that all Plutus scripts
should be blind to the fee change provided. This value is not fixed at the time of 
transaction construction and therefore cannot be used to predict the outcome of 
script validation at the time of construction. Note here that this change may 
in the future make it 
impossible for a script to itself check the produced/consumed balance, as 
the `feeChange` calculation in future eras may require data not included 
in `TxInfo` (e.g. if it depends on how long the transaction was waiting in 

> the mempool).

Reviewer 3: Safest thing to do is to fail transaction validation if an older plutus script is present in a transaction together with `feeChangeAccount` in the same transaction.

There could be an implicit assumption by a Plutus Script that an account that was fully drained by the transaction has zero ADA, while this mechanism can violate that assumption.

That being said, I don't think this restriction is a must have, if we need ability to use `feeChangeAccount` in presence of older scripts then I don't think it would be dangerous to simply ignore translation of this field in the TxInfo for those older scripts.

#### CBOR encoding

> The `feeChange` field is encoded in the transaction body map under a new key `x`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `feeChangeAccount` field is encoded in the transaction body map under a new key `x`.
```

The key `x` is the next available field number in the era into which it is added.
The value will be encoded as `bytes` representing the reward address.

```
transaction_body =
  { ..existing fields..

>   , ? x : reward_account   ; feeChange

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  , ? x : account_address   ; feeChangeAccount
```

  }
```

> ## Rationale: How does this CIP achieve its goals?

Reviewer 4: Including some discussion around, the potential impact of this change on ecosystem tooling would be appreciated in Rationale

Author: will do!

### Choice of reward address over payment address

Reward addresses are already used for staking rewards and pool

> deposits, making them a natural fit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Account addresses are already used for staking rewards and pool
deposits, and crucially for CIP-159 making them a natural fit.
```

Author: I am going to look at the Accounts CIP now, and edit this accordingly after I learn more about the proposal

Crediting a reward address ensures the UTxO set changes remain predictable 

> locally. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Crediting a account ensures the UTxO set changes remain predictable 
locally. Most importantly accounts do not have any minimal deposit requirement, like minUTxO, thus change returned can be as low as 1 lovelace.
```

### Opt-in via optional field

> By making `feeChange` optional, this CIP imposes zero overhead on transactions that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By making `feeChangeAccount` optional, this CIP imposes zero overhead on transactions that
```
